title: La Borda
location: Barcelona, Spain
category: co-operative
description:
La Borda is a cooperative housing project in Barcelona developed in response to the region's housing shortage. The cooperative is built on land owned by the City Council, granted for 75 years for state-subsidized housing. This arrangement allowed local residents to collaborate with architects from Lacol and other consultants to establish a 28-unit sustainable housing complex. The community prioritized three core principles in its development--economic and environmental sustainability, cooperation through community participation, and the advancement of communal living.


To enhance sustainability, the project incorporates multi-purpose common areas to reduce the overall environmental footprint. The building is designed with a high number of south-facing units to maximize heat gain and lower energy costs. Additionally, a central atrium features operable openings that adjust to seasonal changes—promoting compactness in winter and openness in summer.


Affordability and sustainability in communal housing require active and ongoing resident participation. From the outset, the project was shaped by the ideas of its residents, brought to life by architects and engineers. The initial phase included construction workshops, enabling the community to collectively apply their knowledge and skills to complete the building. The cooperative also emphasizes shared public spaces, centering them around a communal courtyard. While each resident has a private space, the courtyard fosters a sense of belonging by providing a shared, open environment that encourages interaction within the community. 
year_completed: 2018
owner: The City Council of Barcelona
architect: LACOL
lot_size_sqft: 7300
floor_space_sqft: 9842.52
units: 28
unit_distribution: 3 different sizes (131/164/249 sqft)
inhabitants_per_unit: 1-5
address: Carrer de la Constitucio, 85, 89, Sants-Montjuic, 08014 Barcelona, Spain
coordinates: 41.36961, 2.13478
