title: Star Apartments
location: Los Angeles, USA
category: public/social housing
description:
The six-story, 95,000 sf Star Apartments expands upon the “the idea providing permanent supportive housing within the downtown core of Los Angeles, specifically the Skid Row Housing.” The building is organized around “three principal spatial zones”, stacked one upon the other: a commercial/retail zone at street level; a second level for community programs; and four terraced floors of residences above.


The building design allows for a “recovery process” for homeless residents based on positive re-socialization, healthy interdependent relationships, and wellness. The project seeks to not only improve the quality of life for residents but to inspire a sense of pride, independence, and dignity.


This design focuses on creation of multiple terraces for communal activities maximising air flow and sunlight. This indoor/outdoor solid/void relationship that it creates plays well against the density and urbanism in downtown Los Angeles.


The LEED for Homes Platinum development was constructed with “prefabricated modular housing units that are cantilevered” on a 2 story concrete superstructure. Individual apartment units were built off-site using prefabricated materials and delivered to the project site and craned into place on the structural podium. These units are spacious and designed to promote independent and healthy living. Individual studio apartments include an eat-in kitchen, bedroom, and bathroom.


As the project had limited budget, the design team used prefabricated modules which were lifted into place over a new structural podium (acting at times like a courtyard). By doing so they were able to meet tighter construction tolerances and sustainability goals while increasing not only the construction quality, but also the quality of living.


The project is the first mixed-use, affordable housing project in Los Angeles to employ this construction method.
year_completed: 2014
owner: Skid Row Housing Trust
architect: Michael Maltzan
lot_size_sqft: 653,400 sqft
floor_space_sqft: 95,000 sqft
#_of_units: 102
#_of_inhabitants: 153
density: 0.001 inhabitant per sqft
outdoor_area: 15,000 sqft
address: 240 E 6th St, Los Angeles, CA 90014, USA
coordinates: 34.04352, -118.24780
